# A minimum-envy location problem for spatial equality of public service
# location model; spatial equality; minimum envy; case analysis
Location problems have been widely applied to service planning of public health, compulsory education, emergency management, and delivery logistics. However, the mainstream location models are usually to optimize the efficiency objectives such as travel cost, facility cost and the number of customs to be served, rather than the equality objectives. A few location models aim to optimize one of the equality measures, such as the variance of distances, the deviation of distances, the Gini coefficient between the travel distances, and the variance of spatial accessibility indexes. However, the facility locations, capacities and their service areas can be easily distorted by most equality-oriented objective functions. In this paper, a spatially envy objective function for service equality is proposed to overcome the shortcomings of commonly used equality functions. The envy value of customers at a location is determined by their travel distance that beyond a predefined distance. The envy function can be added to mainstream location models in a weighted manner. As a result, the capacitated p-median problem (CPMP) is enhanced as CPMP-envy, and the single-source capacitated facility location problem (SSCFLP) is enhanced as SSCFLP-envy. The original and improved models were tested on three large instances. Case experiments show that the equality measures, such as maximum travel distance, variance of distances, and Gini coefficient between travel distances, can be substantially improved by minimizing the weighted sum of spatial envy, travel cost and facility cost. It is argued that the envy indicator has theoretical and practical potentials in facility planning towards spatial equality of public service.
